So, here's the case for not doing
profit-based bidding in Google Ads,
despite what everyone says.
I see agencies, in-house teams, and
freelancers all make the same mistakes
when it comes to profit-based bidding.
And it is that they recommend it to
everyone. Yes, on paper, profit-based
bidding sounds like a no-brainer, and
one of my good friends in industry runs
the best software to track profit in ad
accounts. won't mention until he
sponsors, but I'm tired of seeing
agencies preach profit-based bidding as
if it's the end all be all of Google Ads
free for e-commerce. There are serious
drawbacks in certain scenarios that
nobody seems to want to talk about. So
to summarize what I mean when I say
profit-based bidding, it means simply
that we import your profit from a
transaction. Meaning we take the revenue
minus taxes, minus shipping, minus costs
and other variable expenses to Google
Ads instead of the full transactional
value. But let's first let's discuss the
benefits of profit based bidding and
then we become a smidge more realistic.
And later in this video I'll drop the
biggest reason why you should not run
profitbased bidding in your account.
Keep in mind, I'm a big fan of
profit-based bidding, but like with
everything on this channel, I like to
cut through the BS of best practices and
give you some nuance. Another thing I'll
just wait with until the end of the
video is I'll go through how to mitigate
all the issues I talk about today. So,
if you are running profitbased bidding,
then you don't have to switch back to
revenue tracking. The benefits of
profit-based bidding is three main use
cases, and I'll rank them here from
least to most beneficial. As number
three, you can discover the ideal profit
volume at different rowers levels.
Meaning this magical S-curve in Google
ads bidding means that we can sometimes
generate a lot higher volume at lower
row targets, which will mitigate the
fact that we're actually being less
efficient. This means that testing a
lower ROS target while traffic profit
can show you that A you can get more
profit at a lower ROS target or B you
can get a lot higher volume at the same
profit per conversion or slightly less
meaning you get more customers. Both
scenarios are beneficial in their own
way. The second one is to align business
profit goals with the Google ads
tracking. Meaning that if the business
KPIs are revolving around profit, then
trying to navigate finding the right row
target in Google ads that also generate
the highest POS or profit can be
difficult. So being able to see the
profit number instead of the revenue
number in Google Ads is a great way to
get more aligned in the business. But
the number one thing, the number one use
case for running profitbased bidding is
that you have different margins for
different products. This is what I call
the golden goose of profit based
bidding. If socks are 80% margin but
shoes are 20% margin then you can't
expect to compete if you run the same
row target for all products because all
your competitors that are selling socks
they're running at a much lower ROS than
you are if you try to create like an
average row that you need to hit because
of your average margin then you're not
going to make any money off of off shoes
and you're not going to get any volume
off socks and the bigger your inventory
is the more important this part becomes.
Now, let's just quickly bust two myths
of when profit tracking in my opinion
makes no sense.
So, number one is if you have the same
margin for all the products, then again,
I find it difficult having to say this,
but if your margins are all the same,
then there's no benefit to profit-based
bidding and you're more likely to hurt
your account than it helps. I'll explain
more later in this video about what I
mean when I say will hurt your account.
The second one is that nobody cares
about profit. I understand this one
might be a little bit edgy, but if
profit isn't the core KPI that your
company runs on, then you waving around
and increased profit from Google Ads in
in your monthly KPI meetings will make
you seem stupid. More likely your client
or your boss will say something like
this. Yes, Tim, you produce more profit,
but revenue is down 33% and new
customers is down 50%. That's no good.
And I promise I'll never do that voice
again. But now, like I teased, let's
talk about the biggest drawback that
nobody wants to discuss when it comes to
profit-based bidding. And it is that it
makes smart bidding less efficient. But
first, in order to go through that,
let's discuss what it actually takes to
make smart bidding efficient. Because
one of my biggest research studies the
last few years that we keep going back
to, I keep renewing is to find out what
makes smart bidding efficient. And we
found it comes back to three things.
Number one is lots of data. You know
this already, but you need a lot of data
for smart bidding to be efficient. But
there's two other things that are not
that common. The second thing is
stability in the conversion rate. And
the third thing is stability in your
AOV. Smart bidding uses all three to
predict what your ROS or CPA can will be
with a specific bid. That's how it knows
what to set the bid to. And when one of
the three factors are off, then smart
bidding has a tough time predicting what
the optimal bid is, which can put your
account into a tail spin. There are
especially two cases where PO bidding
makes smart bidding less efficient. The
first one is if you have a lot of
promotions that leads to steep drops and
increases in AOV. And the second one is
if your PO target is pretty low, then
pause will become overly sensitive
relatively to the profit that you're
actually getting. Let's talk through
both because it's not as simple as it
seems.
The first one was related to drops and
increases in AOV. When you track revenue
in a Google Ads account and you run a
20% sale on a $100 AOV product, then you
go from $100 AOV to $80 AOV. Often the
increase in conversion rate will make up
for the lower AOV. So when smart bidding
tries to predict your conversion rate
and your AOV, it's still hitting your
roest targets even though it gets your
AOV wrong and it doesn't have to change
the bits. However, when you drop your
AOV by 20%. You drop your margins by
even more. So let's say that you have
50% margins and in the same scenario as
before, your AOV with profitbased
tracking is no longer $100, but $50.
When you now give a 20% discount, your
AOV drops from $50 to $30. Again, we're
sending in the margin, but not the
entire purchase value. That's a 40% drop
in AOV. This means that smart bidding
suddenly can't hit its targets. And
during a sale, it will start decreasing
bids instead of increasing them, which
is hardly the effect that we're looking
for. The opposite then happens once it's
reduced the bids because now rows will
look too good and I'll start increasing
the bits again. So we end up with this
yo-yo effect with high CPCs and low
rowers one week and low CPCs and high
rowers the next week. The second
scenario is that POS targets become
overly sensitive. If you're targeting
more than 200% PO in your account and
you're typically fine, but anything
below 150% PO target starts becoming
really difficult to work with. The
reason is that if your performance or
your rorowas drops from 150% to 140%.
It's relatively just a 6.3% drop in the
eyes of smart bidding. But for me as the
business owner, as the marketing
manager, it's actually more like a 20%
drop in profit. The difference is in how
you perceive it. A 20% drop in profit
and how smart bidding perceives a 6.3%
drop in ROS can really hurt the
profitability of ad accounts. This is an
issue because if my profit drops by 20%,
I want to be super on it. I'm like that
was happening. But smart beating just
sees a 6.3% drop in rows as normal
fluctuation. So to summarize the issue,
when you run profitbased bidding and you
have a lot of promotions, then smart
bidding ends up being less efficient
because it can't rely on historical
data. The second thing is that your ROAS
targets become less reflective of actual
business results. A relatively small
drop in your ROAS inside your account is
a much bigger drop in profit. And this
is mainly an issue at very low POS
targets. Now, I promised I would talk
about how to mitigate these two issues.
So, you don't just s say, "Oh, Andrew,
you're telling me to revert back to
revenue?" Because that's not always the
best thing. So, let's talk about how to
mitigate this.
If you have a large inventory with
varying margins, profit based bidding is
still one of the best things you can do
for a Google Ads account. So in order to
mitigate it, there are two ways. One is
to run with max CPC uh limits in
portfolio bid strategies. As of right
now, you can't do it in Pmax. The second
thing is changing how you implement
profitbased bidding, which I'll cover at
the end. First, let's just talk about
using max CPCs. So using max CPC limits
can ensure that postbased bidding is
more stable. Normally in accountant
savvy we will set a max bid of three
times the average CPC in an account as
just as a hygiene setting to make sure
Google doesn't bid way too high or
fluctuates too much. But when we run
postbased bidding for accounts with a
lot of promotions we'll set a much lower
max CBC bit closer to 2.5 2x the average
CBC. We've even done 1.5x the average
CPC if we have to. And we've seen that
POA and CBC just goes up and down from
week to week. This ensures that smart
bidding can't be too aggressively when
POS is good. But let's just take out an
actual example and look at it. So here's
an actual example. So this is our
internal dashboards that we use in
Google Sheets. We have for everything in
here. And what we've seen here is that
here is when I started implementing more
aggressive MAC CBC's. And ever since
then, we can see we've been very stable
in our CBC level. We've been down to at
three. We've been up at five. But now,
we're a lot more stable. We can also see
it in the index year-over-year. It's
more where we want to be in this
particular case. We don't want to be at
the same CPCs year over year because
we've it before we took over, we were
over bidding across the board. When we
then look at it, we see that clicks are
more or less stable year-over-year. So,
we're not losing out any clicks by doing
this. We're also looking at conversion
value also seems to be pretty stable.
ROAS in the account or POAS in this case
is actually the highest. It's one of the
highest it's been all year. But the most
important metric here is profit. And we
can see here in the index year-over-year
that we're having 85 87 82% which when
we look at the entire year, we've never
really been at it. And we started taking
over the account around here. So even
before we actually identified this issue
and implemented Max CBC's, we weren't
getting there. We were also launching
new campaigns across a bunch of
different accounts. So there was some
issues there, but even before we took
over, we were way lower. Now we've just
stably gotten closer and closer to
hitting the same profit as we did last
year or as they did last year, which is
a good thing. Now, let's talk about
implementation. Because just because you
want to track your profit, it doesn't
mean you have to change your entire
account to be bidding for profit.
Because remember, we had three different
reasons to do profit tracking. One, our
products have different margins. Number
two was to align Google Ads KPIs with
the business KPIs and three is to
discover the highest profit volume at
different row targets. Only one of these
reasons number one require you to switch
the system to actively bid for profit.
And that's the first one. Like I said,
if you're just trying to align Google
Ads KPIs with business KPIs or just
discover what ROS target drives the
highest profit volume, then you can
basically just set the profit conversion
action to secondary and observe it
instead. So let me show you what I mean.
Here we have an account where we are
tracking revenue as our main conversion
action. And what I've done is I've
created custom columns over here where
we have the custom column for POAS and
we have custom column for net profit.
What these two do is that these custom
columns will pull in the all we'll use
all conversion value because if you have
it set to secondary then it will not be
included if you just say conversion
value. So you have to set it to all
conversion value and that way we then
say minus cost and that way we get the
net profit from here. We're basically
trying to just find out okay if we're
hitting this rorowas what is the pas
we're hitting if we're hitting this
revenue then what are we hitting in the
in profit and here we have like these
are third party brands and here's our
private label and we can see that yes we
are hitting higher rowas uh on our bests
sellers but our our third party brand
and our main are pretty similar however
we are hitting a 10% higher profit with
with our private label because we do
have a slightly better margin but
actually in this case it's not that big
of a deal. So we can actually be just as
aggressive with third party brands as we
can with our private label brands. And
again, this is just having that insight
means we don't sit and worry about this
all the time. The reason why we like our
margins for for for third party brands
here is worse than we have for private
label. But we have a lot of products
where people will click on the third
party brand and they will buy a private
label. So our actual profit is actually
fine. So I can use this and say actually
we don't have to be that aggressive and
set a much higher ROS target for our
third party brands as you would
otherwise think. In this way we get the
best of both worlds. We get insights to
what campaigns drive the highest profit
and we get the full efficiency of smart
bidding. So there you have it. I hope
you enjoyed this more nuanced look at
profit-based bidding. I'm still a
massive fan and I'll continuously say
that if you have varying margin on
products, then it's one of the best
things you can do to optimize your ad
account, but it's not perfect for
everyone in e-commerce, especially if
you run a lot of promotions, despite
what all the cookie cutter agencies out
there want you to think. With that being
said, put a comment, put a like,
subscribe if you like the videos. I'm
there in the comments every single day.
So, any questions, any topics you want
us to cover, just post them there. If
you're into practical PBC insights that
you can actually help you, then
subscribe. I share tips, breakdowns, and
call out what's working and what's not.